hello and welcome to night sky news for
march 2021 with me astrophysicist
dr becky smith this is the series where
we chat about everything that you should
look out for in the night sky in the
coming months
and everything that's been happening in
space news in the past months
so without any further ado let's kick
things off and start
by looking up
now first up on friday the 19th of march
the sort of crescent slash half moon is
going to be pairing up with
mars in the constellation of taurus in
the evening
sky now you want to look for this in the
southwest or the northwest if you're in
the southern hemisphere
out of whatever window that you see the
sunset from essentially
so obviously the moon's gonna be a
really good signpost for where this is
in the sky but if you're looking for
taurus normally i find it easier to just
find a ryan first because it stands out
the most with the ryan's belt and then
use it to pick out taurus sort of above
and to the right of it a little bit
you're going to have the red star
aldebaran which is supposed to be
the bull's eye of taurus and it's been
making a triangle with the moon
and mars and then from there you can see
if you can pick out that classic
y shape of the bull's horn of taurus
then this weekend on the 20th of march
we've also got the equinox the spring
equinox in the northern hemisphere and
the autumnal equinox
in the southern hemisphere so this is
when neither the north pole or the south
pole is
pointing towards the sun and we have
roughly equal day
and equal night all around the world but
one thing i want to highlight that a lot
of people don't realize
is that on the equinoxes the sunsets and
the sun rises are the shortest
they get throughout the year maybe most
people don't even realize that the
sunsets and sunrises do take different
times throughout the year
but it's all to do with the angle that
the sun comes in at the horizon
on the equinox it sets directly in the
west and rises directly in the east if
you think about it that on
the equator that means that the sun sets
directly vertical
with the horizon and so it appears to
set very very quickly if it comes in at
a more
shallower angle it appears to take much
longer so for example in the uk
on march 20th the sunset takes around
about three minutes 40 seconds
ish whereas on june 20th in the middle
of summer on the solstice
it takes about five minutes 40 seconds
so that's a two minute difference in the
uk so
that's a fairly noticeable length of
time
that you might notice that changing in
now fair enough the further you are from
the equator the bigger the difference in
length of sunsets at the equinox
compared to at the solstices you will
actually experience on the equator it's
something like
2 minutes 15 seconds on the equinox
whereas
in the solstice it's 2 minutes 30
seconds so
it's only a 15 second difference but
it's one of those things if you're
chasing sunsets and sunrises at the
minute they are going to be quicker
so don't just blink i miss them then
just after easter on the 6th and 7th of
april
we've got my favorite things in the sky
we have got a toenail moon
with jupiter and saturn just
before sunrise so we'll have switched
into daylight savings times here in the
uk so the sunset's gonna be fairly early
still so it's gonna be about 6
30 or so don't know if i'm gonna be up
at that time but if you
are then look out of the window towards
the southeast if you're in the northern
hemisphere or the northeast if you're in
the southern hemisphere whatever window
you happen to you know
see the sun rise out of or whatever room
gets the morning
sun and you should be able to spot this
so on the sixth the moon's going to be
closest to the fainter of the two
planets saturn and then by the seventh
it will be closest to jupiter
now you need a fairly decent telescope
to be able to see any sort of detail
like the striping of the bands on
jupiter or say the rings of saturn
but if you've got some fairly decent
binoculars you should be able to see
the four biggest moons of jupiter the
galilean moons i know i can see them um
with my binoculars which
are the 15 by 70 medes
they're fairly heavy though so i'd
recommend people get a tripod if you are
going to get some of these i know my
little
noodle arms find it difficult to hold
them steady when i'm looking at
something like jupiter so
get a tripod but if you're looking
enough to have two clear mornings in a
row then what you should look for is the
positions of jupiter's moons actually
changing so you can see this from one
morning to the next for example io only
takes 42 hours
to go around jupiter so you should be
able to see it shift position
24 hours from when you saw it last
speaking of moons
and toenail moons and satin as well
check out this incredible image that one
of my subscribers louis contreras sent
my way on twitter this is saturn's moon
dion taken by the cassini probe way back
in may
2010 and it too looks
like a toenail alright that's enough for
looking up at the beautiful
night sky let's come back down to earth
now and chat about what's been happening
in
space news in the past month
all right the big news this
month was of course that nasa's
perseverance rover landed safely
on mars this wasn't a given you know
about 50
of mars landings have failed in the past
so it was a bit nail fighting if i'm
honest but
the astro community breathed a rather
large sigh of relief
when touchdown was confirmed this was my
live reaction and of course with that
first image
that was sent back as well and we can
allow the sound of the martian wind that
it picked up with its two microphones to
just
wash over us and karma's during these
unprecedented
times
but let's not get distracted by the over
7 000
images it sent back since it actually
landed and let's talk about
science what has percy been up to and
what have the science team behind the
mission been up to
as well mostly they've just been
checking that everything
is okay first he went for a drive so
four meters forward it turned 150
degrees left and then reversed for two
and a half meters
like it was just reversing into this
non-existent supermarket
parking space on mars i don't
know why i've also been able to deploy
the two meter long robotic arm
as well and checked all of its five
different pivot joints are in working
order
they've checked the radar imager is
operational that they're going to use to
map out the terrain underground
and they've checked the moxie instrument
which is the one that will be used to
try and produce
oxygen from the martian atmosphere and
that's all seems to be working okay as
well
plus the wind and the weather sensors
have been deployed too which are now
actively taking data as we speak on the
temperature the humidity the wind speed
the wind direction
on mars now another instrument that's
been tested and found to be working okay
is the supercam instrument and that's
actually been able to send us back
the first science result of the
perseverance
mission so supercam is a combination of
a camera
a laser and a spectrometer which is a
device that essentially lets you work
out
what elements are present in a material
so supercam has sent back a few
super close-up images of some rocks on
the surface the first was dubbed yikigo
it looks incredible you can really see
this like
granular structure or texture to it even
even though this was actually taken from
over
three meters away you can really see the
sort of scale of it
in this image now there's another of
these super close-up images that's come
from super cam as well and this one is
of a rock
dubbed mass which is the rock that they
fired super cam's
laser app for the very first time you
might have actually heard the audio clip
that they are recorded
of this laser being fired on the news
his island's pretty cool and what you
can hear there is actually not the laser
being fired but the laser striking the
rock mass that it's actually being fired
at and you can hear that there is
actually a slight difference
in um the loudness of the sound of the
laser hitting the rock if you listen to
it
and that difference is essentially like
the hardness of the rock that it impacts
the harder it is the louder the sound
that it makes and what that allows us to
do is determine what some of that
martian rock around the jezreel crater
where percy has landed
is actually made of so it's really
exciting because it means we've already
got the first piece of science from the
perseverance mission because supercam
has managed to figure out that this rock
mars is a basalt i.e it's volcanic
so it's either one of two things right
either it's a purely igneous rock
it's made by a volcano or it's made
of like igneous grains of rock like sort
of like volcanic sand
if you will that have all sort of been
compacted and compressed together into
sort of like a cement-like structure
by the water that we think used to be
in this lake bed where you find jezreel
crater at least
before mars lost all of its water to
space a few billion years ago so this is
exciting stuff right you know not only
is it the first ever laser fired on mars
but it's also
the first scientific discovery to come
out of the perseverance mission
as well of course it's just a scratch
tears but a scratch
in terms of like how much science
perseverance still has
left to do and it's definitely going to
turn its focus to this mission of
astrobiology searching for evidence
of past life on mars if there was any
plus it'll soon be testing the
helicopter drone that got sent with
percy as well
a real sort of wright brothers moment
right the first flight
on mars if it works of course it's not a
given the ingenuity will even
be able to buy and incidentally this
one's been nicknamed ginny as well
which i think is my just favorite part
about this whole mission is that we've
got ginny
and percy on mars we've got two of the
weasleys
on mars so i'm just gonna start this
petition now to
name the next mission to mars rendezvous
so that we can nickname it
ron and get another weasley on mars
another weasley i know just what to do
with you
all right that's enough about mars for
one month let's talk about neutrinos
and black holes now so back in 2019 the
ice cube observatory at the south pole
detects the neutrino
with so much energy that it was very
likely
it had come from outer space now they
managed to triangulate where in the sky
this high energy neutrino would come
from
and that doesn't exactly give you the
most accurate
directions it's actually quite a large
swath of sky that you end up with
but in that area of sky there happened
to be a
tde a tidal disruption
event and that's a very boring name for
something that's
really really cool this is when a star
passes too close to a supermassive black
hole and because the forces of gravity
are so
strong it gets spaghettified
i.e resembles less of the star and more
like a really long string of
spaghetti now some of the material from
that disrupted star actually ends up
spiraling
around the black hole anywhere it gets
accelerated to these
huge huge speeds which causes it to
heat up and it starts to glow with
light at least before it crosses the
event horizon it's secreted by the black
hole
that core uses that mass to grow and
that material is literally
never seen again now there's been a lot
of theoretical studies that have said
this process
of accelerating that material around the
black hole
could actually produce these high energy
neutrinos
but obviously the ice cube experiment
team were a little bit wary of declaring
that that is
exactly what they found when they first
found this neutrino
back in 2019 because it could have just
been a flute you know and it might not
have actually come
from this known tidal disruption event
in the area of sky that they thought
this neutrino came from it could have
come
from something else but ice cube has
since detected
another neutrino coming from the same
place in the sky
along with the flare of radio light from
this tde at the same time so stein and
collaborators this month actually
published a paper describing this
detection
and pointed out that this hypothesis of
tdes these tidal disruption events the
spaghettification process
maybe producing these high energy
neutrinos is looking
a lot more likely now with their
observations which is
really exciting because if we could
study these neutrinos and their
properties you know they come
from right down close near the
event horizon you know right before
you'd have to be traveling you know
the speed of light to escape the pull of
the black hole so it can tell us a lot
about that region so i'm really excited
to see if they detect any more
of these things and what we could learn
from them now while we're on the topic
of supermassive black holes it is my
favorite topic after all let's talk
about our own
supermassive black hole the one in the
very center of the milky way that we are
all currently orbiting around
right now now we know that the milky way
is eventually going to merge with the
andromeda galaxy the two are slowly
moving towards each other under
gravity when they finally meet emerge
the two supermassive black holes at
their centers
will also merge as well now we can
estimate how long this process will take
if we
sort of model the merger of the two
galaxies but we need to know how fast
the milky way and andromeda are actually
moving towards each other and we need to
know sort of like what
angle they're going to come at each
other as well is it going to be like a
head-on collision or is it going to be
more of like a glancing blower where the
two sort of
orbit each other for a while and
eventually sort of slosh to the middle
so we can get the speed at which
andromeda is moving directly towards it
by how much
its light is doppler shifted by so
essentially how much that light wave is
squished to shorter wavelengths because
of the speed that andromeda
is moving towards us the same way that
an ambulance siren
is pitched it increases as it's moving
towards you because
the sound wave has been squashed to
higher wavelengths which are
higher pitched sounds now the problem is
that only gives us the speed at which
andromeda is moving
directly towards the milky way it
doesn't give us the speed
in other directions that it could be
moving for example
left and right or up and down that's
something we call
the tangential velocity because it's
moving at a tangent
to the direction towards the milky way
and this is a big deal because if
andromeda has a very big tangential
velocity that could take it sort of out
to the side
of the milky way giving you that
situation where you have a much slower
merger where the two things sort of
spiral around each other and eventually
slosh together in the center
rather than like a direct head-on
collision where you don't have any
of this tangential velocity and so when
we model this happening this actually
has huge consequences for how long this
merger would take
and also what happens in the merger of
the supermassive black holes
as well so this is what shiavi and
collaborators published
this month they published a paper
describing what they found when they
modeled this merger happening for the
galaxies and the supermassive
black holes with various different
tangential velocities and they found
that the time it takes for the black
holes to merge could range anywhere from
5 billion years or even up to 20
billion years for these two supermassive
black holes
to merge so this means that the sun
which is a fairly middle-aged star
it's got roughly five-ish billion years
left before it runs out of fuel it might
not be around to see this eventual
merger of the milky way and andromeda in
their two supermassive black holes
and by extension earth won't be either
all right one last fun thing that people
outside of the uk might not have heard
of
this month so on sunday the 28th of
february an incredibly bright meteor
known as a fireball
blazed across the sky at around 10 pm
and because this is 2021
it was spotted on doorbell cams and dash
cams across
a huge patch of the south of england
and with all of the footage and the
exact locations of those cameras
astronomers were essentially able
to recreate the path that this fireball
took through the sky
and therefore pinpoint the area where it
should have landed and they managed to
narrow it down to the gloucestershire
area
somewhere north of cheltenham and thanks
to a dedicated
search and getting the news out to the
public loads of fragments have been
found in places like people's
drives into farmers fields and this was
incredibly exciting right not only
because
it was the first known meteor to have
landed in the uk
since 1999 but it also turned out to be
an incredibly
rare type of meteor called a
carbonaceous chondrite of the 65 000
meteorites that we've collected over the
years if they've fallen to earth
only 51 of these carbonaceous chondrites
they're actually thought to come from
asteroids that formed in the very early
days of the solar system so they're sort
of like
relics or fossils of what the conditions
were like
back then you know four and a half five
billion years ago
now the chunks they've got are very
fragile they've been described as
looking
almost like coal and it's this fragility
that got a lot of people excited because
that would have broken up in space if it
had been that fragile so there must have
been
something else holding it together and a
lot of people have suggested
well it could have been ice like water
ice and so that feeds into these ideas
this hypothesis
that asteroids and comets could have
been the things that
brought the first water to the very
early earth
i've seen a lot of media reports
commenting on how this kind of meteorite
is what osiris-rex was sent to bennu
to collect and then return to earth and
of course hayabusa 2 as well was
sienta ryugu and that returned its
sample back in december
2020. and all these reports were saying
oh they were sent all that way and one's
just you know happens to have fallen in
the back garden
but we have to remember is that falling
through the earth's atmosphere is
massively going to have contaminated
this meteorite and also sitting in a
farmer's field for a couple of days will
definitely have contaminated it whereas
a sample that's been returned by
hayabusa 2
and hopefully will get returned by
osiris-rex in a few years you know
they're essentially going to be kept
like
quarantined if you will right they'll be
kept in a vacuum away from
any contamination from any earth-based
sources kept as pristine
as possible but what this meteorite
that's fun in the uk will allow people
to do
is essentially have a bit of a trial run
really you know to kind of like
decide what tests and experiments they
want to do on the pristine sample that
they'll probably have a lot
less of so you know they really need to
go in with like a game plan so this
meteorite will essentially let them
figure out their game plan of what
they're going to do with the hayabusa
2 sample and what they will eventually
do
with the sample from venue that
osiris-rex is returning
in 2023 so i guess we just have to be a
bit patient while
all of that goes on but like i'm so
excited to see
what they're gonna find and if they're
gonna find more evidence for this
hypothesis
that the first water was brought to
earth
by asteroids and comets alright that's
it for this episode of
night sky news for march i'll be back in
next month with april's night sky news
but until then if you want to follow me
on social media for sort of like a live
reaction to space news
as it comes in you can find me on
twitter and instagram also
if you liked my t-shirt then check out
my merch in the video description
down below you'll never mind stars in
your eyes
i have a whole galaxy in mine all right
that's enough for looking up at the
beautiful
night sky let's come back down to earth
now it
meant something which is possibly my
favorite thing about this whole mission
is that we've got both ginny
and pursley pursley who's mostly like
percy and parsley put together
in that area of sky with something known
as a td
damn new chair first or like maybe
they'll find something in this um
carbonaceous chondrite meteorite
carbonaceous chondrite meaty you're
right
that is a mouthful